My tape recorder's on.
It's the 26th of January, 1991.
We're in a nice old silver Cadillac being driven by Stephen Plumper.
Okay, I'm going to give you an example of something that happened years ago, and then I'll explain to you who we're going over to see.
Where are we right now?
We're in Des Moines.
I don't know the streets.
But we're in the city of Des Moines.
Yeah.
But we're going to go over and see some people that are friends of mine that have taken me off the street.
I've been a stranger in this city.
And I had to wander around with no place to go and really knowing nobody.
And some of the people of Des Moines have had empathy with me and taken me off the street.
And I know a lot of people like these people in Minneapolis, too.
You said something that you could go to Street Kings in Minneapolis.
What did you say?
Well, I lived in the old rundown part of the city that was Victorian before it became popular.
And I've always liked the down and outers.
I felt myself somewhat down and out.
And I feel a
I have a way of helping them, and they mutually help me.
But these people here, the mother has taken me into her home.
I've eaten there.
I also have helped somewhat financially.
I bought food for them and so forth.
They've given me a place to go, sort of as a fugitive, and I, in turn,
have voluntarily given them food and money and so forth because they've opened their home up to me.
But there's an interesting thing about this.
This is a type of home where most of the young people, or probably none of them have graduated from high school.
They're totally uneducated.
And they have a little problem with the system.
The system is...
kind of turn their back on these kind of people.
And these are the kind of people that are never going to enjoy the culture of rare books and antiques and art.
I figure people that are not aware and that don't know this are sort of like being color blind.
They're not totally blind, but they're not seeing the full aspects of life and culture.
And I've always tried to share this with people through my possessions.
And they have shared
their companionship with me, so I haven't been lonely.
Anyhow, we'll go over there, and what I have to do for their benefit is I'll go in and talk with the mother.
This is a single parent home.
The father
has had his leg cut off and he's living someplace else.
They have to live separate because she says they can't get welfare benefits or something if they live together.
So they're living separate in poverty.
She's taken in a couple of other unwed mothers to help sustain the home.
See, she's taken in some street people.
Okay, sure.
You have your way out here?
Well, it's down a few blocks.
But the thing is, I just wanted to know who you are and what you're about.
I won't spend too much time here.
No, no, no.
And I thought her son Adam wanted to go down and see the house in the tumwa.
And you can learn from these people.
These people, all they have are offers themselves.
They don't have any money or anything else.
And these are the type of people that
are basically good people.
Like I say, all they got is themselves.
And yet, the educational system, maybe she can't communicate or whatever, has turned their back on these people.
Her kid has been kicked out of school.
She's gone to school.
The mother's gone to school and tried to get the kid in.
They argue with her.
They're abusive.
And these are the kind of people that are never, as our
society evolves and there's more education and technology, and as education becomes the necessity of surviving in our culture, these are the kind of people that are going to slip through the cracks.
And I just feel that the educational system, you know, on a lower level is spending what they can't.
So we'll go over and we'll meet Mrs. Madison.
She's been a friend of mine.
and uh maybe i took a friend of hers down to the house or maybe her son is wanting to go maybe we'll take him along we'll you can visit with him you can visit with her and uh go down to otomo but mostly we'll talk about you know how where i lived i'm interested in talking about books too oh yeah yeah and
I have a friend named Mr. Hall living at the house who sort of took me in in Cincinnati years ago, and I've given him a place to live for the rest of his days.
How did you find it somewhere?
It was kind of by accident.
I was looking at a place in Missouri, and I came back up here, and I was with my father and uncle, and he said, why don't you look at...
some of the towns around here.
So we happened out of Tumlin.
I happened to find this house.
Because rent was so high in Minneapolis, I was having to move because of urban renewal every year or so.
And I wanted to get to some place where I wouldn't be torn down and pushed out by a building.
You wanted a big place, too.
Yeah.
So I got this.
I wound up in Tumlin.
It's kind of like.
So 18 and 16.
I don't know.
I know how to get there, but I don't know how.
Now what year is this caddy?
76.
Last of the old full-size cars.
What do I need to know about Stevie?
Let me ask you a first question.
Your name is spelled S-T-E-B-E-S-T-E-P-H.
Which one is it?
P-H.
Why do they have a V-E-N and all the damn papers?
I mean the papers at the courthouse.
They're all B-E-N.
It's crazy, isn't it?
But you prefer P-H-E-N.
Yeah.
Well, I didn't call them words.
I understand, but we're going to put you in between night covers if we want to get it right.
So what do I know?
Introduce yourself to me.
I'm really interested in your collecting.
Oh, I'm kind of like Jerry is.
He used to go to a lot of garage sales, and yard sales, and old houses.
There's girls go in these old empty houses around town looking for stuff.
There's a lot of beautiful stuff, these old gerald buildings.
You could see they're collectors too, like I am, aren't they?
I don't know.
I think they're probably a collector on a much larger scale.
Yeah, yeah.
But you've been collecting all your life, right?
Yeah.
When did the passion for books start?
All back in my teens.
When the focus started, I mean, from everything I could see.
I really started out, I was interested in 78 photograph records and books.
I had thousands of those too.
You listened to them?
Yeah, yeah.
Back before 1910, the gimmick was they'd sell you a cheap machine, and then they had different ways of recording or different sizes of holes, and you'd buy the machine, but then you'd get hooked into having to buy the record that was modified to the machine, like the Pathé records and the Edison records were recorded in a Hill and Dale process.
That means the sound
When a loud note was sounded or something, it cut a deeper groove.
We couldn't play those records on a Victrola because those were recorded laterally or side to side or like the Columbia's.
So you had to have all these different machines to play all these different records.
So I had this large collection of these old antique machines to play the different kind of records.
Because I liked music before 1930.
Before 1930, this country had a lot of immigrants and ethnic groups, and they recorded a lot of ethnic music that sort of has been lost after the Second World War.
For instance, I had the Austro-Hungarian national air and the Tsars ran march and things like that, which are sort of obsolete tunes.
Do you think, Stephen, that you were trying to build an iPad?
Yeah, I was.
And I tried to learn everything I could about anything I was interested in.
What, in your view, is the purpose of an archive?
Is it to serve scholarship, to document posterity, or what?
To serve humanity, every aspect of humanity, not just the fortunate that can afford.
It seems that there's education in this country up to a certain point.
If some of the people don't conform or can't conform or don't know how to conform, they're kind of pushed out of the educational system in a sense.
And then, of course, if they make it through high school, then they have to have the wherewithal to go beyond.
For instance, Jerry has an eight-year-old or ten-year-old daughter, and guess what she wants to be?
An archaeologist.
I've always...
twin passions as a child were archaeology and astronomy.
Yeah.
Just odd by the stars.
So just like Jerry, she's interested and does beautiful work with Victorian dresses.
That must have just thrown you over when you saw those Victorian dresses.
Well, yeah.
Her skill did, but it doesn't surprise me.
There's culture.
On all levels, you know.
That wasn't the direction of my point.
My point was the fact that she was creating these Victorian items.
Oh, yeah.
Where you yourself are particularly fond of the Victorian era.
Yeah, yeah.
That's what I meant.
Yeah.
In other circumstances.
What can't we talk about, Stephen?
I don't want to dance around.
Oh, gosh.
I don't know.
I can't.
I guess I can't talk about particulars in case at this time.
It's still pending.
And I don't want to jeopardize you in any way.
Yeah, yeah.
But by the same token, I do want to talk about your collecting and your interest in your collecting.
Well, I've got an interest in people, too.
That's sort of really intertwined with it.
I've really always, since I left home and...
You know, I've been out on my own.
I've sort of been having the, you know, I've been with different groups of people just, you know, because I had to.
Like in here I could get to Des Moines.
I don't know anybody.
I had to find somebody.
So I find Rick under the bridge and his friends and these people.
It's nice to be accepted.
I guess we could talk generally... My book starts with a sense that the most painful... At every point in the life of every collector, there comes a point where the precious volumes must pass to other hands, where we have to face the fact that we're merely custodians of these things.
I've said the same thing.
It's, in fact, the same order.
Is that right?
Yeah.
And I wonder what your...
what your feeling was?
What were your plans for this library that you were building?
Well, I didn't get the chance.
I always was worried that it would be destroyed or wouldn't pass on.
I think, like you say, our duty is just you're curators of take care and pass on.
Yeah.
But I did that with everything, Victorian architectural ornaments and
So much of it isn't being cared for and is being destroyed.
Yeah, but the point is, you dealt in other antiques.
You retained books.
Why is that?
Well, the books were a source of reference for stuff.
More than reference, though.
I mean, the books on discovery and exploration, early settlers.
Well, as I travel, I'm always interested in why is this place here?
or what happened or, you know, history is just a lot of, it's planned, but most of it's circumstance.
So everywhere I went in the country, I could get into a small town or whatever, and I'd note a little something about the history.
And I'm just always curious.
You know, I don't take the interstate highways that much.
I take the back roads.
How many miles would you say you've driven over the last 20 years?
Have you ever tried to figure it?
I imagine over a million miles.
I drive over a hundred thousand miles a year.
You like the road?
Yeah.
And meeting people on the road.
And how many cars have you had over the last 20 years?
40.
40 cars?
And you like old ones?
Yeah.
What would you say is the most contemporary car you've ever had?
This one.
This one?
76?
Yeah.
Would you like to have lived 100 years ago?
Yeah, I think I would.
Would it have been a more agreeable time to live?
Yeah.
Yeah, it was, people were more, I think, more honest with each other.
They could rely on each other more instead of on the system.
People could have their own, like, home industries.
Like if Jerry tried to open up
some sort of a business there, she'd have to get a license, and it would just, it seems like you're held down.
You can get up so far, but if you get up to a point, you have to, you know, like Henry Ford, for instance, could have never been in the automobile today.
Anything that's changed is first resistant, and then as people see it,
benefits and they gradually accept them.
But for instance, Henry Ford with the automobile, he'd go out and with today's regulations, if he started building these forceless carriages in his garage, he couldn't hire employees because he probably wouldn't have had enough money to pay social security, pay this, pay that.
pay health benefits and so forth.
Just the overcoming of the bureaucracy for first of limited means would have been beyond his capabilities and the horse's carriage might not come into being if we hadn't had all the restraints.
Okay, I'm back on again.
Yeah.
So you'd say you've driven about a million miles over the last 20 years?
Oh yeah, yeah.
I'm not so sure I got tighter on the air, but I want to make sure we get it again.
And I do want to ask you again, just to make sure I have it, that you felt that you were being a custodian?
Oh, absolutely.
Maybe you might talk about that a little more.
And I try to share that with young people, you know, and I learn from the old people, like Mr. Howe,
Like he tells me about his youth, he was brought up in the hills of Kentucky and his folks were killed at a very young age in flood.
He was put in the Louisville Baptist orphan home and adopted out to some people called the Spurlocks who had a mule and a sharecropper's farm.
I don't think he ever knew his real father.
Barely knew his mother.
But it's interesting to talk about the past with him and how things were in the old days.
I'm always interested in recording the old people's ways and then passing it on to the young people, like Adam, because, for instance... And how do you do that in recording?
You can't really do it like in a classroom.
You have to live it, you know.
You have to get two groups together and get them to mix.
Like, I used to have a lot of old people that would sell me stuff or that would go to estate sales.
And I'd have the young people along with me to help me load the stuff and work with it.
So, you know, the two groups would mix, which
generally wouldn't socialize otherwise, and they'd get an interest and respect for one another, you know.
How did you feel yesterday, and this won't relate to anything, but how did you feel when you saw all those people walking by the table and handling the Nuremberg Chronicle and these papers?
Well, I was hoping they'd handle it carefully.
Did it upset you?
Did you feel any kind of... No, I wished I could have been over there telling them about it.
What they were.
In fact, that Costanzo book isn't an original.
It's a reprint from the 30s, and they've got it mis... Really?
The Costanzo?
Yeah.
They've got it misidentified.
I imagine the Hano Library knows what it is, but that was one of the Sam Marano 80 books.
And...
The original of that would be very, very rare, but that was a 1930s reprint.
It was probably a privately done thing by Henry R. Wagner.
He was the cartologist and scholar of Spanish Southwest America in his day.
In fact, he wrote a wonderful bibliography called The Spanish Southwest, and he published it in Albuquerque.
It was part of a series.
of books, the Spanish Southwest.
And it's still the bibliography of colonial Southwest America.
But he did some privately printed stuff like that.
One of the things that I've noted, and I've interviewed perhaps 25 really interesting collectors so far, is that inevitably there comes a point where I know that this person knows his books.
And I have to wonder, I mean, when you acquired a book, I have to believe it didn't go immediately on the shelf.
I mean, you must have read it and devoured it and certainly became intimate with it.
Well, generally, I knew about the book before I acquired it.
Really?
I knew its significance.
Whether it was in a library or in a junk store at the bottom of the box, I knew it instantly.
How did you find out about it?
I read it before you went to acquire it.
Oh, I read.
I knew.
You knew?
You know, I knew bibliographies.
So you had a want list?
In my head.
Uh-huh.
And some things I'd write down, very little I would, but I'd know.
And the goal was to create a collection.
Is that a fair statement?
Well, partly, and most of it was security, because I feel there's an article a few days ago in the paper where there
going to devalue the ruble.
You see, paper money is nothing but a promise to pay.
It's not actually, it says right on the note, this note is legal tender.
Well, when I was a kid, a dollar bill used to say this, his note is redeemable in one dollar in silver.
And the government with their paper money is sort of like
A guy with a stolen checkbook that's getting away with it, he's going to write as many checks and the government's going to print as many bank notes as he can.
They have nothing to back it by that's exchangeable, you know.
And gold is, you know, gold or people's work or food's even more valuable, but it's their commodities that are exchangeable for
a promise to pay of course in order in order to have a commercial system i mean you said security though you you equated the books with security what did you mean the books were security in in that they were a form of knowledge or a form of uh art and that to be enjoyed mostly as a form of knowledge and something to impart knowledge on to other people who
oftentimes wouldn't have had the opportunity to have access to that knowledge or to open new avenues of knowledge to people, you know.
Okay, now you talk about access.
Did you at some point want the world to know about the Stephen Blumberg collection?
Yeah, but I'll mention something that happened early, very early in my collecting about access.
I was going around Minneapolis
looking at the Victorian house, and I picked up with an old man.
His name was Doc, and he was a draker and a wino, and he didn't have many friends.
But Doc remembered a part of town called Elliott Park, right near downtown Minneapolis as a boy.
He grew up there.
And there was a mansion in particular on 10th Avenue and 14th that was the old Shaw Mansion that was torn down for a high-rise nursing home that I had a picture of in a book.
And I was showing it to old Doc and he says, I remember as a kid going over there and they had a barn and some cows and they would give milk to my mother and our family.
so we could have milk for the children.
And I remember going to the back door and Mrs. Shaw giving us milk.
And I remember going in that house and going through it.
Well, this is a house that has, it was a Victorian mansion that has no documentation in Minneapolis at all, except that there's an illustration of it in Atwater's history of Minneapolis.
So I wanted to go down to the public library and further
check on this place, because here I had an individual, a man, probably the last living being who could describe the Shaw Mansion, who was a contemporary of the old Shaw Mansion.
So I go down there and I ask the curator, you know, I looked up in the car catalog, I asked the curator, can I look at pictures of Minneapolis homes?
There was a listing in there.
I want to see if there's any photos of this home or
something about it because I have a man here that he was somewhat drunk at the time but who had seen one of these homes firsthand and I wanted to just look through these pictures because he could
say, oh, that's it.
A lot of the pictures weren't chronicled as to where they were.
I knew some of them, but they just had, you know, a vanilla folder full of pictures and interiors of old Minneapolis residences.
And I wanted him to, if we spotted it, he'd say, that was it.
I remember that, or I remember this corner, or I remember that.
So I go in there, and some stuffy old woman says,
Well, yeah, you can look at this, and she sits with us, and she says, she looks at her watch, and she says, well, I've only got 15 minutes with you people, and... That upset you?
Yeah, because here I had... A primary resource, shall we say.
Yeah, she didn't even want to hear about that this fella had actually seen this place, or hear his...
part of history.
You know, maybe if I go to the Minneapolis Historical Society or something and somebody was doing research on Elliott Park mansions or on Shaw, I could tell them that Mrs. Shaw helped out.
indigent people in the area and i could tell them a little bit about the home that they had a barn and had a cow and so forth because i talked with somebody that personally sure i was part of those people's life i living in the late 20th century am a link to the 19th century and i can depart depart that information on to adam who's going to live into the 21st century beyond me you see
You're talking about acquiring this information on an interpersonal basis.
Yeah.
See, I'm a curator of knowledge.
You see?
I've read this phrase, Didion of the past.
Is this a phrase of yours?
Well, I've read of it another time.
Is this a rescuer of the past?
Is that a phrase that you've used to describe your activities?
Would you say?
Pretty much, yeah, because it's been on all different levels besides books.
And I've always been eager to impart this on to other people.
The books are one sense of it, music, architectural things, but the most precious thing is knowledge.
Adam, do you agree with this, Adam?
Was Stephen passing information on to you?
Yeah.
Like what?
I mean, he's taken me to a new place.
I've never really been to a tunnel.
And I don't know.
I think there's stuff that I'd like to see.
And he's told me there's antiques and everything at his house.
And I'd like to see some of them.
He likes little knickknacks and things.
I just thought it was a good opportunity to ask a question.
Yeah.
You made the reference.
Did you know, Adam, years ago, they used to, people used to have cows and things in their house, or in their yard and that, and people grew their own food and people were more self-sustaining.
They didn't go to the supermarkets and that.
What's the road you're on?
We're on Highway 92 heading east into Los Caloos, and then we're never dropped out of the hotel room.
beautiful countryside now are these cornfields or this yeah this is probably all cornfields that's iowa it's nice country i like the difference in culture too i notice your new england culture i'm a minneapolis in which we're sort of minnesotans are either farmers or urbanites half of the citizens of the state of minnesota live in the big
Minneapolis-St.
Paul metropolitan area.
So we're the Minnesota the half of the city folks versus the half of the country folks.
Now Iowans by large are rural.
You can notice even though these people are from Des Moines, you can notice
similarities in your culture and my culture that are different from their culture.
Their culture, even though they live in the biggest city in Iowa, is still somewhat rural, isn't it?
That's right.
In comparison to ours, you know.
Did you ever fear for your safety at all while you were acquiring?
Oh, quite a bit, yeah.
Quite a bit.
But then again, once I got to know people in the areas, I don't.
I imagine the east side of Des Moines is one of the rough areas of Des Moines, but I'm pretty much safe there.
I know people there.
But I mean while you were building the collection?
Oh, yeah, somewhat.
A lot of what I collected was out of the slums of the city, you know.
Books, too?
Yeah, some, and then in other respects, you had to...
I never really did have much fear for my safety as far as the book, so I didn't figure some librarian was going to shoot me or anything.
But I mean, did you think that some night there might be an armed guard or something like that, or no?
No, I'd know that.
There was.
I was able to find that out.
Was it exciting?
Oh, yeah.
Or was it scary?
Well, I was sort of consumed by the passion to collect.
I really didn't.
in my mind seeing an original costanzo or something i'd be so involved in that i wouldn't really think about the why's or the where did you want the world to know about your collection at some point yeah i did i was gonna if i died leave a endowment to sort of
have this discovered, and to have these go back to the proper curators.
And in a way, I'm living, now that this thing has come out, I figure this has been my death, and I'm living after my death.
You're seeing the things that might have happened, that you might not otherwise have happened.
Yeah, I'm living after my death.
Well, are you enjoying it in that regard?
In the regard of being able to share it with you and Adam and Jerry and so forth, but I'm not enjoying looking forward to the possible consequences and seeing the injustices that are being done.
Like what injustices?
Like roads ripping off the stuff and simply selling it.
You never suspected him at all as being the Judas in your house?
No, he acted like a kind man.
Neither did Mr. Hall.
He's a professional government con, is what he is.
And in fact, I was involved very much in his personal life.
I knew him for 15 years.
I knew his wife before they got married.
I know of the tragedies and the pain that he's caused personally in his life.
His wife is afraid to assist me because she says he's a threat to kill her.
Really?
He's a very violent, vicious person.
And that seems to be the kind of people the government likes to identify with and to conceal.
They don't want to be honest about this.
My day of honesty has come.
My day of court is here.
Everybody's world's going to know about me.
But yet the government doesn't want to be honest and
Talk to you.
Are you involved in a conspiracy with them?
Collaboration.
Yeah.
Or collaboration is what they said.
Or Rhodes says, as you told me, yeah, I'm a bad guy.
I am a bad guy.
Yeah.
Yeah, he is a bad guy.
And he looked me in the eyes when he said it.
Yeah.
And he said it's in a chill-up, I suppose.
But, hey.
I wonder why he waited 15 years.
Do you think he was waiting until he could make a big score out of it?
No, I think in the past he was a friend.
And he realized his moment.
He realized his weakness.
He came out of his room one day in the morning.
He used to sleep till late.
And he was involved heavily in drug activities in Detroit.
And I'd taken him in and said, hey, let's go on the road together like we did in the old days.
Look at that old 47 ship.
Isn't that a dandy?
But anyhow, he says, he came out of his room.
He said, Steve, I'm so miserable.
I sat up last night with a loaded gun, and I was going to blow my head off.
He says, I don't know what I'm going to do.
You're my last friend that I trust.
His drug partner in crime at Frank Spaulding had just got busted flying some drugs up from Mexico.
And they had a scam where two guys would get plane tickets and switch luggage.
And then when they'd get up, the other guy would pick up the luggage and they'd got onto it and they'd caught him with the plane with the baggage tickets and arrested him.
And Rhodes...
had already gotten in some sort of a trouble connected with this drug ring.
Frank was known and was supposed to give Rhodes like, I saw a payoff of $2,000 in cash in Frank's office.
And Rhodes was already known.
He'd been the middleman, collected Frank and the other people up with the individuals down by the Texas border that were bringing it up.
You see, they'd get it in like a 300-pound cell for 900 pounds in Detroit and fly it up.
Well, anyhow, Rhodes' cover was blown, so he wanted to come to Iowa and live with me and kick back.
He'd just gotten divorced, too, and was losing custody of his kids, and that was an emotional strain.
This bust was a strain.
And he came to me and he said, Steve, can you take me in?
Because I want to kick back, do antiques, remain anonymous.
He said in his testimony that you asked him in.
No, that's bullshit.
It was the other way around.
Yeah.
And do antiques and sort of lay low until my lawyers can straighten this out.
And then I'll try to get my life back together, you know.
And I know this is a fact.
Our investigators have brought this out.
But the thing is, I guess the authorities got on him too heavy, and he had to trade me off.
Plus, he needed a reward.
Get $56K.
Yeah.
And he was looking for 10%.
20 million, which would have been 200,000.
But he moved in with me.
He moved all his stuff.
I went over to his house and got his stuff.
He moved a half a truckload of stuff.
And when we went on the road, we sold a lot of that stuff.
And he was getting short of stuff.
And he was asking me, he wanted me to sell the Curtis books, for instance.
He said he had a prospective buyer.
And he wanted a percentage out of it.
And here he lies up on the stand and says, I turned Bloomberg again because I was afraid of
this loss of cultural stuff, you know.
He wanted to see them go back to their wife alone.
Yeah, no, he told me down in Canton, Texas.
Three months before this came down that he had a Indian buyer that was interested in the Curtis stuff and he The Indian collector of Western Americana Indians and he wanted to act as a middleman to sell the Curtis books Did he say did he offer a figure?
Did he suggest a figure?
Well, he knew they were worth at least a hundred K and
I don't know if he was trying to set me up at that point.
He needed some money or if it was a legitimate thing.
And he wanted to take one of the books and sell it and show it to him to verify it was there.
In fact, he gave me a $20 and a $10 gold piece from this supposed collector that, you know, it was supposedly a wealthy collector he had met from Tennessee down there to show that was selling artifacts himself.
that would buy rare things and wouldn't ask any questions and he like gave me a 20 to 10 dollar gold pieces upfront money he said well this collector's also got a large cache of gold coins and he gave me these coins to give to you to show that we could trade for gold coins and i said well that's awful nice of you but here's what they're working i gave roads the money
back for the coins i said i appreciate the gesture and uh i wouldn't mind meeting the fellow i'm learning about his collections and that but i'm really not interested in selling even if the price was 100k no not at any price good and he'd uh he got on me for about a month and then he says well why don't we
And he said, how'd you get them?
And I said, well, I looked at the national list, union list, you know, and I know where they are.
And he said, well, let's, could you take me over and show you, show me the list?
Oh, this is Rose.
Yeah, I'd like to find out where there's a set.
Maybe I can get myself a set and sell him a set.
And I went over to a library and we looked it up and they have like nine or 10 of them in the union list.
There are nine or 10 of them.
Yeah.
And he wanted to know, he says, well, if you've been to some of these places, tell me.
and tell me the security setup because, you know, if you're not going to sell yours, I'll get a set and I'll sell him mine.
And he says, well, I don't know.
You do what you want to do, but I don't really want to be part of it.
I've got my set.
So you never acquired duplicates, by the way, did you?
On occasion, I did.
That seems to be the ultimate.
I read the book.
That's the ultimate.
symptom of bibliomania is to acquire a duplicate.
I think A. Edward Newton said that.
Yeah, well, you know, especially if it's a rarity, somebody else could probably get some research.
Or a better copy.
Yeah, well, moving up is fine.
Yeah.
Moving up.
How about condition?
Did condition matter to you?
Not that great.
I can't see whether the thing is moving, but it is.
But I try to keep them in good condition.
Yeah, condition mattered as far as... Once you acquired it.
Yeah, yeah, I didn't, I would feel terrible if the book was damaged.
Do you think that any books, other than the things that have been described in the proceedings,
Do you think any of the books got into worse condition once they came into your care?
No.
And did you always at least maintain?
No, I always did.
And if they needed the boards, they needed attaching, I'd have them bound.
And then where did you send them out?
Did you have the people who did it?
I did it myself.
Oh, you did.
And I, yeah, I had some people that did it.
I had a fellow in Amarillo.
But you basically did your own conservation work.
Yeah.
Yeah, I oiled it with Deekswood oil or that other type of stuff.
Yeah, I did a lot of my own work.
Did you ever think of doing a catalog over here and stuff?
Yeah, someday I was going to.
My catalog, though, was in other catalogs.
I take, like, the Evans collection or the Streeter collection, and I just put marks by the
entries, and I knew which books I had by what I had in the Streeter collection.
I could go through a big collection like the Streeter collection and just mark off, check off which books I had of that collection.
And that's how I cataloged my collection, was through other collections.
I used my bibliographies, like Henry Wagner's Spanish Southwest, or the Streeter Collection, or the... The Streeter Collection was quite extraordinary.
Yeah, yeah.
And I could look up my books through those books, through cross-referencing those books.
That's how I cataloged my stuff.
Of course, my architectural stuff, there isn't too much done yet.
Hitchcock did a book on 19th century architectural books, but I didn't have much to index that by.
But I used, for instance, Goodspeed's copy of fishing and that, and his thing on Daniel Fehring to catalog the fishing books.
The Fehring collection at Harvard was superb.
on fishing books i'm really not interested in fishing that much but i think daniel fearing as far as being a bibliophile of the 19th century from what i've seen of his stuff him and arthur or uh clark of cincinnati not arthur clark he was a bookseller in cleveland but uh there was also an earlier bookseller in the 80s in cincinnati
who did reprints of, one of the first to do reprints of Valuable Americana, and his collection, which is at the University of Cincinnati, and the Cincinnati Historical Society, they were two of sort of the ultimate 19th century collectors, because they took their books, which were somewhat contemporary books at the time, and put them in fine findings and organized them, and Bering, I guess, had every thing that was available in print,
on pectorology or fishing at the time, you know, up to 1910.
These have a pretty distinctive minding, I think.
Yeah.
There's some green and... Yeah, green and red.
Green and red, yeah.
Yeah.
Which made it... The green ones were...
domestically published.
The red ones were foreign published.
I just guessed that I hadn't read from what I'd seen in the Harvard Library and how they would classify it.
I didn't even think they knew they were gone, by the way, until they were invited out to see them.
Yeah, that's the thing.
A lot of this material, it's good that it's there, but most of it is unknown, even by the people that have it, or unknown in the context.
For instance, I'd like to do a bibliography of 19th century view books, because I've collected
Most of my view books that I have, I've collected by just acquiring them in the antique shops and so forth.
There's really no collection.
Is it a stereoptic view?
No, the little view books, they're pre-postcard with the brown and white lithotons that molded out.
There were a number of publishers years ago, Adolph Wittemann, Albertite did photogravure things.
They were sold by souvenir companies.
cities in the late 19th century.
H. Nelson of Portland, Maine.
You look in the back of some of them, they'll have a listing of the different views of different cities.
They were view book publishers.
And I collected those because, you see, I'd have them with me.
And when I'd go through different cities of the 19th that were in existence in the 19th century and I had a view book, I'd always drive around, look for the views and the spots.
you know like fourth and main or the first national bank or the president of the banks residence or whatever did you uh as it is now compared to as it was in the view book did you have any remorse at all did you feel that you would
taking something valuable from somebody else yeah i felt if there were somebody else i did have quite a bit of remorse i felt if there was somebody else just like me who was who maybe would have been unknown but yet would have had the insight into finding these materials they wouldn't be there for them and i felt i had to get these
back or to be made accessible to other people in some way.
How would you have done that in your own mind?
Well, I was going to bestow the knowledge to as many people as I can or have people in to see them while I was alive.
How were you going to do that?
Well, when I died, I was going to leave at my will a confession and a trust to do this.
That's why I say I'm sort of living my death.
How did you enjoy your collection?
I saw some photos in the file of the course.
Mostly bringing people up to see it, like I'm showing you my house for Tumba.
You're going to see the skeleton of my life, you know.
The empty shelves.
When's the last time you were down here?
A week ago.
This is probably going to be the last time I'm going to be able to come here because I'm gone for an extended period of time.
The house will probably.
Mr. Hall will die.
I'll call him disrepair.
Maybe get torn down for a parking lot, the ever classic.
Now, I understand your father's coming in.
Today, yeah.
Testifying.
Did he know about your collecting?
Well, he knew.
Yeah, I knew about the collecting.
He fixed his obsession, but no, I didn't know about any of the other stuff.
Any of the means, shall we say?
Of course, I spent an awful lot of money on the majority of the stuff I bought.
Yeah, I think there's a point that hasn't come out, you know, and I'd like to make that.
I would like to ask you that.
They say they recovered in excess of 20,000 books and manuscripts.
Yeah, absolutely.
But they haven't distinguished between how many were purchased legitimately by yourself and those obtained otherwise.
And as you know, in the antiquarian market, there's a lot of ex-library stuff out there.
Ex-libris stuff.
Ex-libris, yeah.
A lot of tomes.
That's right.
So give me an idea.
Give me an idea of the numbers.
Well, go in any bookstore.
Well, it depends.
I mean, in your collection, the numbers that were purchased, that acquired
You know, since these moves out of Elliott Avenue, I haven't gotten my whole collection out.
And most of the stuff that, the earlier stuff that I acquired hadn't been unpacked yet.
Now, did they?
Oh, I'd say easily 50% or even more.
How much would you say you spent?
Over the years, a book collection.
Did you have a rough idea?
$100,000.
I bought and bought.
It adds up, you know, $20 here, $30 there.
Did you ever go hungry?
Would you choose to have a book or a meal?
No, I'd have read after a book.
Any day of the year?
Yeah.
Let the record show.
He's smiling broadly at that question.
Did you, in fact, ever go hungry?
Well, yeah, I haven't had breakfast yet.
But why don't we stop in one of these towns and go into a fine little ma and pa restaurant?
Have you guys eaten?
I knew that.
Nobody should be hungry in the land of plenty.
Dinner's on me, huh?
Or breakfast, shall we call it.
All right.
You hungry, Adam?
Have you ate yet?
No, we're going to have more than bacon.
We're going to have a good meal.
Have you ate one?
Oh, okay.
We're going to eat.
I always fed my people, you know.
You did?
Yeah.
Many of my friends were hungry.
I thought those young fellas that testified, they looked heartbroken up there being forced to do that.
Yeah, I've known them.
I've known either their folks or them since they were...
One fellow waiting outside for you, he wanted so desperately to talk to you.
And you could tell, he was angry.
They had him by the short hairs.
I've known those guys for 10 years.
Beautiful country, huh?
Yeah, yeah.
That's another thing that strikes my curiosity is that you know a lot about American history.
And a lot of my family backgrounds from Seymour, Iowa, where Jesse James had robbed the bank down there.
My grandmother used to own a 100-room hotel, and the railroad used to ride across the front of her property.
They had to pay her to run the train across her property.
every time they went across her property.
And she had all kinds of old artifacts or anything.
And a lot of that stuff got lost or just got left behind.
And if there had been just somebody that would have been there to get it and to take it somewhere where it would have been safe and just watch over it, we'd still have those things to this day.
They wouldn't be maybe in the city dump somewhere 400 feet under the ground.
Did you ever get any?
You know, I know people that have found very valuable things in the dump.
Have you ever gone to dumps looking for things?
Well, you can't in Minneapolis because there's so much machinery and that going and they just are bulldozing it over that you can't go to the dump, per se, but in these neighborhoods like East Des Moines, you know what the dump is?
You know where people throw their stuff?
On the street.
Either on the street corner or in empty buildings.
if you get into boston or new york or something you'll find that any building that's been boarded up and opened up and there are open knockout windows at street level you'll find them filled with garbage and that the empty buildings are the dumps of the inner city neighborhoods vacant buildings and also the treasure troves that's where you'll find the painted over
Russell and Erwin hardware of the 1870s, and under the floorboards, the coins.
You look under the floorboards?
Oh, yeah.
Did you usually find things there?
Yeah.
Often, shall we say?
Oh, yeah.
Behind radiators and bathtubs and heat register grades.
I'm enjoying this ride.
Oh, great.
Yeah, I'm enjoying your company, too.
Yeah.
We can do this any way you want.
If you feel at all guilty about telling about, if you feel you have to tell your lawyer and Ray that you're with me, that's up to you.
But otherwise, it's between you and me and the kids in the backseat.
It's up to you.
I just think that while these people... I still trust people.
I don't care how much of a snake Rhodes is.
Yeah, but I don't want... I trusted him.
That was something.
You know, when I heard them play that tape, because I've been their newsman for 20 years.
And I had a big story.
I don't need this on the tape.
What did you say about Dwayne?
Oh, that Rhodes.
Dwayne got in late one night when he taped us, and he was waking up with a hangover.
And he taped Dwayne, you know.
I don't know.
That's when he was on the tape.
I feel bad because I took Dwayne over there, and
It was really to get me, and I hate to see innocent people get got because of me, you know.
The classifier.
Yeah.
Do you think they were on to you for a while, though, or do you think that you would still have your collection if it went for Kenny Rhodes?
Oh, they were on to me, but I quit certain aspects of my...
collecting by and large in certain parts of it.
Except I broke down just that last time I was going to Texas and Rhodes told me when I was going down there, all you ought to, if you're going down to Texas and you ever get to Houston, you ought to go back to Rice University like you and I did, you know.
That's, I kind of, I kind of,
Went back there for nostalgic purposes, and then I sent him a letter.
Of course, that was the infamous letter, you know.
I don't know about that.
That hasn't been entered, has it?
I don't know if it hasn't.
I wrote him a letter from Rice University where he and I had gone.
You shouldn't have done that.
What did you say in the letter?
Oh, that I'd made a visit like he and I had.
He'd requested that I. So he was setting you up all at every step of the way.
How do you feel?
I mean, what does that do about your feeling, your faith in human nature?
Well, I'm not going to lose it.
I'm going to keep trusting people like I trust you, you know.
But as far as an agent of the US government and their action, it doesn't surprise me.
It doesn't surprise me.
They got to him.
$56,000 in my friendship was his price.
I wouldn't betray Adam for any amount of money.
I wouldn't rat on Adam if they said, hey, Steve, we'll give your books back and let you go.
If I'd known Adam had done something illegal or harmful, I'd say, well, Adam, you might get busted or maybe this isn't good for you or whatever.
But I wouldn't rat on him to get out.
You know, if they said, Steve, we'll give you your books back,
We'll give your money back and let you go, but you give us Adam.
We know he'd done this.
We've done that.
I wouldn't do it.
Adam has given me one thing.
He's given me his friendship.
That's worth more than anything.
You can't put a price on that.
I'll make new friends if I go to prison and so forth.
I'll get things in there.
from some of those prisoners, as friendship, there are some good people in there.
And I'll get that.
And their friendship is more precious, like Adam's friendship, than any price, or even than freedom, you know?
You don't rat on people.
You don't betray friendship.
Nobody likes a snitch.
I don't care.
Even the government deep down inside knows.
Like they say, when you sleep with dogs, you get fleas.
Yeah.
I know another collector who lives up in Elgin, Oregon.
His name is Sam Forall.
And he's an old mountaineer man with a hair lip, wears a sidearm on his hip.
He owns a bunch of property up there, and he has a collection of old cars like you wouldn't believe.
It looks like a menagerie of junk old antique cars that go way back to the pioneer days, back when his family, his descendants,
And he has rifles, an old fire truck, fire engine.
And he just, he lives up there in the peaceful serenity of the mountains and enjoys everything he has and enjoys life, really lives life to the fullest.
And that's what I believe.
People are curious of that.
You want to live life to the fullest and get as much knowledge as you possibly can and then provide that knowledge to everyone else in the world.
I'll bet you that guy in Oregon's got the same attitude, don't he?
You go into his place, he likes to show his cars.
He'll show you everything.
He'll let you fire his old buskets.
He'll take you for help.
take you up the mountain and show you old abandoned gold mines.
I mean, I went fishing with him one day when I was only about 13, 14 years old when I lived up in Ellison, Oregon in the mountains.
My father got this wild hair when he seemed older in his family.
He wanted to get some government property and we were going to homestead up in the mountains.
We met Sam Correll.
And he took me fishing one day.
We were sitting along the mountain stream fishing for trout.
And he just jumped up with his pistol and fired it.
And he blew a hell of a rattler.
I mean, not more than probably five or six feet.
And he was just a little fitty.
Because them little fitty ones can get you just as good as them bacon.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
Just a happy-go-lucky guy.
Mountaineer man.
His wife, she's so old-fashioned.
She'd go out in Splitwood.
Go out, you know, just pioneer woman all the way.
Good as gold.
They'd invite anybody that was bad, that was in peril, you know, that didn't have any food or a place to live.
He'd invite them in.
He'd get them into a place and property that he owned.
They wouldn't let them get back on their feet.
I used to do that with that house in Otomo.
I took Kenny Rhodes, and he was...
up against it or he told me he was up against it and uh mr hall and i used to these young people you know when they would get fights you know their wives and their girlfriends would throw them out or they'd have problems oh i knew a kid named billy laquay and his brother
He's in a gang called the Naturals in Minneapolis.
He's an Indian and Native American.
They have a gang called the Naturals.
What's his name?
Billy Laquay.
And his brother knifed a guy from a rival gang from another Indian family.
So they put out a contract like on Billy and his mother.
That's all that were left.
He's got some sisters, but they're not living in the immediate proximity.
Billy was scared for his life.
So I brought him down to Otumwa to live in this day with me for a while, just sort of him and David Olson, just sort of as a refuge out of the city.
And those guys, those boys you've seen testifying, they used to the joblessness and having to give their blood to get enough money for gas and that.
That would get to them after a while, and they used to like to come on the road with me or come down here to Ottumwa just for a few days just to get away from it all, you know.
So my house was sort of a refuge.
Are you going to sell the house?
Well, I don't want to because I want to have a place to go after this is all.
And inflation will get so bad that by the time I'm done, I won't...
be able to afford any place.
You know what they are in New England and they're what they were.
I got this house for $16,000 and it's a 17-room house and it's paid for.
I got a place.
And when did you get, when did you buy it?
88.
I'm going to just put this on the other side.